docs: add few examples settings for new csi management (#17599)
rook/rook: Documentation/Storage-Configuration/Ceph-CSI/csi-configuration.md

---
title: CSI Configuration
---

CSI drivers are managed by the [ceph-csi-operator](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-csi-operator). This means CSI tuning is done
through CSI operator custom resources (`OperatorConfig` and `Driver`) and the ConfigMap `rook-csi-operator-image-set-configmap`.

!!! important
    The Rook ConfigMap `rook-ceph-operator-config` no longer applies CSI settings.

This document provides some example CSI settings that may need to be customized.

## OperatorConfig vs Driver

Per the [ceph-csi-operator design](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-csi-operator/blob/main/docs/design/operator.md),

> `OperatorConfig` holds operator-wide defaults; each `Driver` CR manages one driver instance and

Reviewer: nit: I generally suggest to avoid semicolons if it sounds better as two sentences.
```suggestion
`OperatorConfig` holds operator-wide defaults. Each `Driver` CR manages one driver instance and
```

allows per-driver customization. Driver `spec` fields take precedence over matching
`driverSpecDefaults` on `OperatorConfig`.

Many settings can be set on either resource. Use them as follows:

* **`OperatorConfig`** (`ceph-csi-operator-config`) — one per operator namespace. Set
    `spec.driverSpecDefaults` for defaults that apply to **all** CSI drivers (RBD, CephFS, NFS, and
    others), such as shared images, log level, controller replica count, or node plugin kubelet path.
* **`Driver`** — one CR per driver type (for example `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`). Use `spec` on
    a `Driver` to **override** those defaults for a single driver, or to set options that only apply
    to that driver (for example `deployCsiAddons` on RBD only, or `cephFsClientType` on CephFS).

## Default CSI Settings

> The default CSI settings are applied by Rook in `deploy/examples/operator.yaml` (the section after the operator, ConfigMap).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default CSI settings are applied by Rook in `deploy/examples/operator.yaml` (the section after the operator ConfigMap).
```

> ## CSI settings reference

Reviewer: Two questions:
- How about if we duplicate this section to the rook-ceph operator chart? 
- Is there a ceph-csi-operator chart for non-helm settings? It seems odd to refer them to helm settings for manifest-based installs.

Reviewer: @Madhu-1 It would be very helpful for the users to have some manifest examples of the CR settings. Non-helm users won't find the helm settings very useful. I'll open an issue for this, but we can proceeds with these examples for now.

---
title: CSI Configuration
---

> Starting with Rook v1.20, CSI drivers are managed by the

Reviewer: The docs are versioned, so no need to mention the rook version.
```suggestion
CSI drivers are managed by the
```

[ceph-csi-operator](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-csi-operator). This means CSI tuning is done

> through CSI operator resources (`OperatorConfig`, `Driver`, and `ImageSet` ConfigMap), not by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through CSI operator custom resources (`OperatorConfig` and `Driver`) and the ConfigMap `rook-csi-operator-image-set-configmap`.
```

> editing legacy CSI keys in `rook-ceph-operator-config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
editing keys in the ConfigMap `rook-ceph-operator-config`.
```

> editing keys in the ConfigMap `rook-ceph-operator-config`.

Reviewer: Let's make a separate note that hopefully makes it more obvious about the changes in this release.
```suggestion
!!! important
    The Rook ConfigMap `rook-ceph-operator-config` no longer applies CSI settings.
```

> This page focuses on admin-managed CSI settings and gives examples for:

Reviewer: Let's only focus this doc on the manifest examples. The helm docs should then only focus on the helm values examples.
```suggestion
This document provides some example CSI settings that may need to be customized.
```

> - manifest-based workflow (`kubectl apply` / edit CRs)

Reviewer: Remove these two lines

- Helm workflow (`ceph-csi-drivers` chart values)

## OperatorConfig vs Driver

Many settings can be set on either resource. Use them as follows:

* **`OperatorConfig`** (`ceph-csi-operator-config`) — one per operator namespace. Set
    `spec.driverSpecDefaults` for defaults that apply to **all** CSI drivers (RBD, CephFS, NFS, and
    others), such as shared images, log level, controller replica count, or node plugin kubelet path.
* **`Driver`** — one CR per driver type (for example `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`). Use `spec` on
    a `Driver` to **override** those defaults for a single driver, or to set options that only apply
    to that driver (for example `deployCsiAddons` on RBD only, or `cephFsClientType` on CephFS).

> Per the [ceph-csi-operator design](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-csi-operator/blob/main/docs/design/operator.md),

Reviewer: Move this paragraph before the bullets. This will help describe the overall behavior, then the bullets will have some more detail.

Author: Done

`OperatorConfig` holds operator-wide defaults; each `Driver` CR manages one driver instance and
allows per-driver customization. Driver `spec` fields take precedence over matching
`driverSpecDefaults` on `OperatorConfig`.

> ## Where to update settings

Reviewer: Let's point out in this section where to find the default CSI settings for manifest-based installs. 
```suggestion
## Default CSI Settings
```

> - **Manifest**: CSI resources in `deploy/examples/operator.yaml` (the section after the operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default CSI settings are applied by Rook in `deploy/examples/operator.yaml` (the section after the operator
```

>     ConfigMap), plus `deploy/examples/csi-operator.yaml`.

Reviewer: The csi-operator.yaml does not contain settings, right? It's just the csi-operator and rbac, so it does not contain any settings to customize.
```suggestion
    ConfigMap)
```

Author: Right, no CSI settings in `csi-operator.yaml` file

- **Helm**: `ceph-csi-drivers` values (`operatorConfig.*`, `drivers.*`) and image overrides.

## CSI settings reference

For the complete list of ceph-csi-operator chart settings, see:
[Ceph-CSI Drivers chart configuration](https://github.com/ceph/ceph-csi-operator/blob/main/docs/helm-charts/drivers-chart.md#configuration).

## CSI-Addons sidecar

Previously: `CSI_ENABLE_CSIADDONS` in `rook-ceph-operator-config`.
Now set `deployCsiAddons` on `OperatorConfig` or `Driver`.

```yaml
# OperatorConfig (manifest)
apiVersion: csi.ceph.io/v1
kind: OperatorConfig
metadata:
  name: ceph-csi-operator-config
  namespace: rook-ceph
spec:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    deployCsiAddons: true
```

```yaml
# ceph-csi-drivers Helm values
operatorConfig:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    deployCsiAddons: true
drivers:
  rbd:
    deployCsiAddons: true
```

## Custom container images

Previously: `CSI_*_IMAGE` keys in `rook-ceph-operator-config`.
Now use the `ImageSet` ConfigMap referenced by `OperatorConfig`.

```yaml
# ImageSet ConfigMap (manifest)
apiVersion: v1

> kind: ConfigMap

Reviewer: Let's just link to the defaults in operator.yaml. I don't think we need to copy this example yaml here since operator.yaml already has a full example.

  namespace: rook-ceph
data:
  plugin: "quay.io/cephcsi/cephcsi:v3.16.2"
  provisioner: "registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-provisioner:v6.1.1"
  attacher: "registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-attacher:v4.11.0"
  resizer: "registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-resizer:v2.1.0"
  snapshotter: "registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-snapshotter:v8.5.0"
  registrar: "registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-node-driver-registrar:v2.16.0"
  addons: "quay.io/csiaddons/k8s-sidecar:v0.14.0"
```

```yaml
# rook-ceph Helm values (renders ImageSet)
csi:
  cephcsi:
    repository: quay.io/cephcsi/cephcsi
    tag: v3.16.2
  provisioner:
    repository: registry.k8s.io/sig-storage/csi-provisioner
    tag: v6.1.1
```

Also see [Custom Images](custom-images.md).

## Controller replicas and strategy

Previously: `CSI_PROVISIONER_REPLICAS` in `rook-ceph-operator-config`.
Now use `controllerPlugin.replicas` and `controllerPlugin.deploymentStrategy`.

```yaml
# OperatorConfig (manifest)
spec:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    controllerPlugin:
      replicas: 2
      deploymentStrategy:
        type: Recreate
```

```yaml
# ceph-csi-drivers Helm values
operatorConfig:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    controllerPlugin:

>       replicas: 2

Reviewer: We should set 2 replicas by default in operator.yaml so it is production-ready, then they shouldn't need to customize it. Minikube users (developers) might just want to set it to 1.

Author: Made default 2 in operator.yaml

kind: Driver
metadata:
  name: my-prefix.rbd.csi.ceph.com
  namespace: rook-ceph
spec:
  controllerPlugin: {}
  nodePlugin:
    updateStrategy:
      type: RollingUpdate
```

```yaml
# ceph-csi-drivers Helm values
drivers:
  rbd:
    name: my-prefix.rbd.csi.ceph.com
```

## Enable NFS CSI driver

Previously: NFS CSI deployment was reconciled by the Rook operator.
Now create the NFS `Driver` CR (or set `drivers.nfs.enabled` in Helm).

```console
kubectl apply -f deploy/examples/csi/nfs/driver.yaml
```

```yaml
# ceph-csi-drivers Helm values
drivers:
  nfs:
    enabled: true
    name: rook-ceph.nfs.csi.ceph.com
```

## Node plugin kubelet path and SELinux host mount

Previously: `CSI_KUBELET_DIR_PATH` and `CSI_PLUGIN_ENABLE_SELINUX_HOST_MOUNT` in
`rook-ceph-operator-config`.
Now use `nodePlugin.kubeletDirPath` and `nodePlugin.enableSeLinuxHostMount`.

```yaml
# OperatorConfig (manifest)
spec:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    nodePlugin:
      kubeletDirPath: /var/lib/kubelet
      enableSeLinuxHostMount: true
```

```yaml
# ceph-csi-drivers Helm values
operatorConfig:
  driverSpecDefaults:
    nodePlugin:
      kubeletDirPath: /var/lib/kubelet
      enableSeLinuxHostMount: true
```

> ## What stays outside this page

Reviewer: I would suggest to remove this section. This doc just focuses on `OperatorConfig` and `Drivers` CRs, so I don't think we even need to mention these other CRs.

Author: Done

> ## All settings reference

Reviewer: Let's put the link to the CSI config at the top of this page before all of the examples.

Author: Done
